3.3.1.1 The concept of hazard in a geographical context
Nature, forms and potential impacts of natural hazards (geophysical, atmospheric and
hydrological). Hazard perception and its economic and cultural determinants. Characteristic human
responses – fatalism, prediction, adjustment/adaptation, mitigation, management, risk sharing –
and their relationship to hazard incidence, intensity, magnitude, distribution and level of
development. The Park model of human response to hazards. The Hazard Management Cycle.

3.3.1.2 Plate tectonics
Earth structure and internal energy sources. Plate tectonic theory of crustal evolution: tectonic
plates; plate movement; gravitational sliding; ridge push, slab pull; convection currents and seafloor spreading.
Destructive, constructive and conservative plate margins. Characteristic processes: seismicity and
vulcanicity. Associated landforms: young fold mountains, rift valleys, ocean ridges, deep sea
trenches and island arcs, volcanoes.
Magma plumes and their relationship to plate movement.

3.3.1.3 Volcanic hazards
The nature of vulcanicity and its relation to plate tectonics: forms of volcanic hazard: nuées
ardentes, lava flows, mudflows, pyroclastic and ash fallout, gases/acid rain, tephra. Spatial
distribution, randomness, magnitude, frequency, regularity and predictability of hazard events.
Impacts: primary/secondary, environmental, social, economic, political. Short and long-term
responses: risk management designed to reduce the impacts of the hazard through preparedness,
mitigation, prevention and adaptation.
Impacts and human responses as evidenced by a recent volcanic event.

3.3.1.4 Seismic hazards
The nature of seismicity and its relation to plate tectonics: forms of seismic hazard: earthquakes,
shockwaves, tsunamis, liquefaction, landslides. Spatial distribution, randomness, magnitude,
frequency, regularity, predictability of hazard events.
Impacts: primary/secondary; environmental, social, economic, political. Short and long-term
responses; risk management designed to reduce the impacts of the hazard through preparedness,
mitigation, prevention and adaptation.
Impacts and human responses as evidenced by a recent seismic event.

3.3.1.5 Storm hazards
The nature of tropical storms and their underlying causes. Forms of storm hazard: high winds,
storm surges, coastal flooding, river flooding and landslides. Spatial distribution, magnitude,
frequency, regularity, predictability of hazard events.
Impacts: primary/secondary, environmental, social, economic, political. Short and long-term
responses: risk management designed to reduce the impacts of the hazard through preparedness,
mitigation, prevention and adaptation.

16 Visit aqa.org.uk/7036 for the most up-to-date specification, resources, support and administration

AQA AS Geography 7036. AS exams June 2017 onwards. Version 1.0 2 June 2016

Impacts and human responses as evidenced by two recent tropical storms in contrasting areas of
the world.

3.3.1.6 Fires in nature
Nature of wildfires. Conditions favouring intense wild fires: vegetation type, fuel characteristics,
climate and recent weather and fire behaviour. Causes of fires: natural and human agency.
Impacts: primary/secondary, environmental, social, economic, political. Short and long-term
responses; risk management designed to reduce the impacts of the hazard through preparedness,
mitigation, prevention and adaptation.
Impact and human responses as evidenced by a recent wild fire event.

3.3.1.7 Case studies
Case study of a multi-hazardous environment beyond the UK to illustrate and analyse the nature
of the hazards and the social, economic and environmental risks presented, and how human
qualities and responses such as resilience, adaptation, mitigation and management contribute to
its continuing human occupation.
Case study at a local scale of a specified place in a hazardous setting to illustrate the physical
nature of the hazard and analyse how the economic, social and political character of its community
reflects the presence and impacts of the hazard and the community’s response to the risk.
